Document Starlark (#858)
cirruslabs/cirrus-ci-docs: docs/guide/programming-tasks.md

Starlark language is a procedural programming language [originated from Bazel build tool](https://docs.bazel.build/versions/master/skylark/language.html)
but ideal for embedding within any other system that want to safely allow user-defined logic. There are a few key differences which made us
choose Starlark instead of common alternatives like JavaScript/TypeScript or WebAssembly:

1. Starlark doesn't require compilation. No need to introduce full-blown compile -> deploy process for a few dozen lines of logic.
2. Starlark script can be executed instantly on any platform. There is Starlark interpreter written in Go which integrates nicely with Cirrus CLI / Cirrus CI infrastructure.
3. Starlark has built-in functionality for loading external modules which is ideal for config sharing. See [module loading](#module-loading) for details.

## Writing Starlark scripts

Let's start with a trivial `.cirrus.star` example like this:

```python
def main():
    return [
        {
            "container": {
                "image": "debian:latest",
            },
            "script": "make",
        },
    ]
```

> `main` simply returns a list of task objects which will be serialized into YAML presentation like this:

Reviewer: This looks like a regression from https://github.com/cirruslabs/cirrus-cli/blob/236173c844d56c923b8f0c932bb8a04550cd7e15/STARLARK.md#writing-starlark-scripts to me, since such important details like who runs that `main()` and when are omitted.

Author: IMO it's a clarification over

> Once run in the Cirrus CLI, it will internally generate and parse the following YAML configuration to produce the actual tasks to run:

```yaml
task:
    container:
      image: debian:latest
    script: make
```

Then the generated YAML is appended to `.cirrus.yml` (if any) before passing the combined config into the final YAML parser.

> With Starlark, it's possible to generate parts of the configuration dynamically based on some external conditions: by [making an HTTP request](#http) to check the previous build status

Reviewer: It would be nice to refactor these two examples into a bullet list, because it's rather hard to read this sentence in one pass due to it being loaded.

Author: See 829a048f7c79a22be75a1ab60269dd89ced082d6

or by [parsing files inside the repository](#fs) to pick up some common settings (for example, parse `package.json` to see if it contains `lint` script and generate a linting task).

> Even more importantly: with the [module loading](#module-loading) you can re-use other people's code to avoid wasting time on things written from scratch.

Reviewer: Perhaps we can improve on CLI's `STARLARK.md` and simplify this to:

```suggestion
And with the [module loading](#module-loading), you can re-use other people's code to avoid wasting time on things written from scratch.
```

For example, there are official [task helpers](https://github.com/cirrus-modules/helpers) available that reduce the boilerplate when generating tasks:

```python
load("github.com/cirrus-modules/helpers", "task", "container", "script")

def main(ctx):
  return [
    task(
      instance=container("debian:latest"),
      instructions=[script("make")]
    ),
  ]
```

### Entrypoints

Different events will trigger execution of different top-level functions in the `.cirrus.star`. These functions reserve certain names
and will be called with different arguments depending on the event which triggered the execution.

> #### `main`

Reviewer: Consider calling it `main()` instead (and everywhere else) to convey that it has to be a function.

Author: See 05c63c8a0fddade38fb5d565764b65d8cbeaf9f7

`main` is called once a Cirrus CI build is triggered in order to generate a list of tasks to execute within that particular build.

#### Hooks

It's also possible to execute Starlark scripts on updates to the current build or any of the tasks within the build.
Think of it as [WebHooks](../api.md#webhooks) running within Cirrus that doesn't require any infrastructure on your end.

> Expected names of Starlark Hook functions in `.cirrus.star` are `on_build_<STATUS>` or `on_task_<STATUS>` respectively.

Reviewer: Perhaps we could list all of the possible hook names in a bullet list to simplify discovery of all possible status values?

Author: There are a bit too many of them so I've added a reference to GraphQL schema and a few most popular hooks in 2a8c54f07e8ca1aa3cf818974589365e12f61edc

> These functions should expect a single context argument passed by Cirrus Cloud. At the moment hook's context only contains

Reviewer: This looks like a regression from https://github.com/cirruslabs/cirrus-cli/blob/236173c844d56c923b8f0c932bb8a04550cd7e15/STARLARK.md#entrypoints to me.

In CLI's docs, a short glance below the entrypoint allows the user to discover arguments and a return value and skim across if needed.

Also, https://github.com/cirruslabs/cirrus-cli/issues/386 talks about `main()`, but do we want to mirror the same feature for hooks?

Author: I think it's a bit less documentation like in terms of explicitness. Right now there is only a single context is passed. In case there will options in future we can rework it similar to how it was.

And yeah, I created cirruslabs/cirrus-cli#386 to allow skip mentioning of the context here. Once we'll think of anything worthy to add to the context we can rework this part. Right now `ctx` is always empty and IMO should be omitted.

a single field `payload` containing the [same payload as a webhook](../api.md#webhooks).

> One caveat of Starlark Hooks execution is `CIRRUS_TOKEN` [environment variable](#env) that contains a token to access [Cirrus API](../api.md).

Reviewer: There are both Starlark Hooks and Cirrus Hooks occurrences across the document, perhaps we should only pick one?

Author: Fixed in 9ffc826ac963948e94024fc64d696a2eeaad843c

Scope of `CIRRUS_TOKEN` is restricted to the build associated with that particular hook invocation and allows, for example,
to automatically re-run tasks. Here is an example of a Cirrus Hook that automatically re-runs a failed task in case a particular
transient issue found in logs:

```python
# load some helpers from an external module 
load("github.com/cirrus-modules/graphql", "rerun_task_if_issue_in_logs")

def on_task_failed(ctx):
  if ctx.payload.data.task.automaticReRun:
    print("Task is already an automatic re-run! Won't even try to re-run it...")
    return
  rerun_task_if_issue_in_logs(ctx.payload.data.task.id, "Time out")
```

### Module loading

Module loading is done through the Starlark's [`load()`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark/blob/master/spec.md#load-statements) statement.

> Besides, the ability to load [builtins](#builtins) with it, Cirrus can load other `.star` files from local and remote locations to facilitate code re-use.

Reviewer: Why the comma?

```suggestion
Besides the ability to load [builtins](#builtins) with it, Cirrus can load other `.star` files from local and remote locations to facilitate code re-use.
```

Note that this is an error to read a file with `fs.readdir()`.

Example:

```python
load("cirrus", "fs")

def main(ctx):
    tasks = base_tasks()

    if fs.exists("go.mod"):
        tasks += go_tasks()

    return tasks
```

### `is_test`

While not technically a builtin, `is_test` is a [`bool`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark/blob/master/spec.md#booleans)
that allows Starlark code to determine whether it's running in test environment via Cirrus CLI. This can be useful for limiting the test complexity,
e.g. by not making a real HTTP request and mocking/skipping it instead. Read more about module testing in a [separate guide in Cirrus CLI repository](https://github.com/cirruslabs/cirrus-cli/blob/master/STARLARK-TEMPLATING.md#testing).

### `env`

While not technically a builtin, `env` is dict that contains [environment variables](writing-tasks.md#environment-variables).

Example:

```python
load("cirrus", "env")

def main(ctx):
    tasks = base_tasks()

    if env.get("CIRRUS_TAG") != None:
        tasks += release_tasks()

    return tasks
```

### `changes_include`

> `changes_include()` is a Starlark's alternative to the [changesInclude()](writing-tasks.md#supported-functions) function commonly found in the YAML configuration files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`changes_include()` is a Starlark alternative to the [changesInclude()](writing-tasks.md#supported-functions) function commonly found in the YAML configuration files.
```

Author: Thank you!

It takes at least one [`string`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark/blob/master/spec.md#strings) with a pattern and returns a [`bool`](https://github.com/bazelbuild/starlark/blob/master/spec.md#booleans) that represents whether any of the specified patterns matched any of the affected files in the running context.

> Currently, supported contexts:

Reviewer: Why the comma?

```suggestion
Currently supported contexts:
```
